---
layout: post
current: post
cover: 'assets/images/bldg2.png'
navigation: true
title: NIX Kernel
date: 2018-11-14 10:18:00
categories: [techblog]
tags: linux, code
class: post-template
subclass: 'post tag-linux'
author: rob
---

# Topics - NIX Kernel

> Linux: the choice of a GNU generation -ksh@cis.ufl.edu
> (more like) "Compiling the colonel sanders" - my SO, wisdom

Editor Note:
- The material below was cobbled together for personal use, from attributed sources, and endured some mild look/feel massage.
- Document Purpose: Conveniently scoped refresher on the listed Linux material.

Sources: 
- LPIC2 Prep - Linux Academy
- Photo by Pierre Châtel-Innocenti on Unsplash

## The Linux Kernel
### Knowledge Targets
- Utilize kernel components that are necessary to specific hardware, hardware drivers, system resources and requirements. 
- Implement different types of kernel images, identifying stable and development kernels and patches, 
as well as using kernel modules.
- Focus on standard way of doing things.

Servers:
- Centos - 2.x.x kernel tree
- Debian - 3.x kernel tree

### 201.1 Kernel Components
#### Kernel Source and Documentation
- Weighting of 2 on LPIC2, so only expect a couple questions.
- Kernel source is typically not installed by default
- Challenge - each distro has special additional steps that differs from others.
**Centos**
- `uname -a` to see current kernel 
- `/usr/src/kernel`, - `yum install kernel-devel`.  When this completes, a folder for current kernel in this dir. 
- LPIC2 Exam - requires general steps for building a kernel
- Documentation
  - 2.x and older, docs separate.  3.x+ docs come with.
  - Default: `usr/src/linux/documentation`, or possibly (centos) `/usr/share/doc/kernel-doc-<version>/Documentation`.
  - Often online doc will point you to a file in here.
 **Debian**
 - `apt install source linux-image-$(uname -r)`
 - `/usr/src/linux-headers-3.13.0-36/Documentation`

#### Components
- Boot directory `/boot` 
- vmlinuz is the actual kernel itself
- Z-image (compressed image of your kernel)
  - Low memory sized image to support older systems with 512kb limit
- On modern distros (2.0+)
  - "BZ image type", aka "Big Z Image".  High-memory image.
  - Since 2.6, uses better compressing bzip2
- 4.0+ xz compression.  XZ is better compression ratio, but slower.  Uses more resources.

### 201.2 Compiling Kernel
#### Prep - Dependencies
Centos
- Group Install
  - `yum groupinstall "Development Tools`
- Others
  - ncurses-devel, qt-devel, etc
  
Your going to need a bigger boat for all the devel libraries needed (99-ish)

Debian
- `apt install make gcc lib-ncurses5-dev`
- `apt install build-dep linux-image-$(uname-r)`
- ex: `cd /usr/src/linux-headers-3.xx.x-xx`
- Make
  - make distclean, make mrproper, make clean
  
  
#### Compiling
Makefile
- General information for gcc on _how_ to build software (not specific to a kernel bld)
  - Contains two kinds of information, information for entire env (flags and env vars), and make with targets
  - ie make clean
  - targets determine behavior of make action (based on passed in arg, ie make clean)
##### MAKE CLEAN
`make clean`
First thing we need to do is create a configuration file
There are a dizzying list of options
##### MAKE MENUCONFIG

(1) **Menuconfig**
- `make menuconfig` is a nicer (ncurses) way of answering those option questions.
- Reads a number of different scripts, and current config for kernel
  - When we installed kernel, we got a config file
  - We will pick the things we want installed and not installed
- Go into sections..
- ..anything with:
  - star - built in
  - blank - excluded, not present loadable or otherwise.  Just means it isn't built into K.
    - Doesn't mean we can't use it later.  LKM
  - "<M>" is a module,"< >" Module capable
- `cat /usr/src/linux-3.13.0/.config`
- There are other options, but menuconfig is the most reasonable.

(2) **Walkthrough, editing .config via make menuconfig**
- You could drop floppy driver support
- Block devices
  - "Normal floppy disk support" - change from "M" to excluded.
- You can go through and make a large number of changes.  For a general desktop/kernel, you'll never have a reason.
- Write file and exit.

(3) **Compile**
- Takes hours
- Make sure you have a couple gig of disk space available
- Start by making large image.  `make bzImage`.  Mainline kernel based on chosen options.
  - Runs a while (say 10s of minutes), builds kernel and kernel modules that we need.
  - First kernel image completes.  Then you build k modules.
  - `make modules`, from in src dir.  Runs a while (say 1s of hours).

(4) **make modules_install**
- Completes, see output lines prefaced by "INSTALL"

(5) **Relocate completed binary**
- source `/usr/src/linux-3.xx.x/arch/x86/boot/bZimage`
- Move, use standard naming convention
  - `mv bZimage /boot/vmlinuz-3.xx.x-xx.x86_64`
- Need to create initramfs for boot
  - dracut utility
  - `mkinitrd /boot/initrd-3.xx.x-xx.img 3.xx.x-xx` (example you'd do in normal compile, and is what LPIC2 looks for)
  - Debian special - `mkinitramfs -o /boot/initrd-3.xx.x-xx.img 3.xx.x-xx`
- Last, we would deal with **GRUB**
 

### 201.3 Kernel Runtime Mgmt and Troubleshooting
Weighted 2x as heavily as kernel building
Unlike modules built-in during compile, there are loaded in as needed to supplement the base kernel.
- They are not loaded in and taking up memory when the K starts.
  - Only when there is a device or a reason for them to exist there.
  - Called **LKM**, loadable kernel modules
  - Review how to load, configure, add, remove

Knowledge Targets
- Manage and/or query a 2.6.x or 3.x kernel and its loadable modules. 
- Identify and correct common boot and run time issues. 
- Understand device detection and management using udev, including troubleshooting udev rules.

#### UNAME
Popular command, can give info about the kernel

```bash
rmay@dev-vm:~/Projects/dojo$ uname -a
Linux dev-vm 4.15.0-43-generic #46-Ubuntu SMP Thu Dec 6 14:45:28 UTC 2018 x86_64 x86_64 x86_64 GNU/Linux
```

**Output:**
- SMP - kernel designed for multi-core procs
- kernel name, uname -r
- machine name, hardware type, platform (m,p,i)

**Loadable modules**
- `/lib/modules/<version>/`
- .ko, kernel objects
- In `kernel/`, broken out by type
- Different levels in each dir
- Higher level, more general driver
- These are all drivers we can load via LKM. 

#### DEPMOD
depmod and modules.dep
- You might need to copy an already compiled kernel module to your system.  
  - Those typically have an installation program that moves associated files.
- There might a possibility that you just have object itself.  
  - If all dependency libraries are present, you just need to drop the file.
- In order to use it, you need to be aware of a command and couple of files.
  - Those tell the system what other things it might depend on, and map out how that KO fits in to device driver hierarchy.
- Utility is called depmod, also handles map files.  Resulting output is called modules.dep.
- Run anywhere is smart enough to find needed things.
- See modules _map_ files:

```bash
rmay@dev-vm:~/Projects/dojo$ ls /lib/modules/4.15.0-43-generic/
build  initrd  kernel  modules.alias  modules.alias.bin  modules.builtin  modules.builtin.bin ...
```

- If you copy a module into here, you'll need to regenerate the maps
  - `depmod` Looks for KOs and sees where they fit.
    - Output, `cat modules.dep` Has a bunch of info.  Listing of all detected modules on systems
    - Delimted by a colon, two fields.
    - **First col - K module**
    - **Second col -dependencies, separated.**
      - If blank, no deps.  
  - Map files are further definitions, of what K modules and devices are mapped to what types of information.
    - Example, .usbmap has references to interfaces, drivers
    - **TLDR: A way for the K to know, if something is plugged in, how to locate & load the appropriate device driver.**

#### Listing, Adding, Removing Loadable Kernel Modules (KM)
Review - Loadable modules extend the kernel as needed
- When something is there, it should be loaded, when something is not there, unloaded.
- There are instances where you might need:
  - ..to manually load a KM for testing.
  - .. you installed it and want to make sure it is installed correctly (missing dependencies errors)
  - .. remove it b/c it is installed, but you want to free up the memory

**LS Mod command `lsmod`**
  - Module, Memory footprint in bytes, Used by
  - Good for determining how safe it would be to remove a module.
  - `lsmod | grep lp`

**RM Mod**
- `rmmod` - see man.  Also could use `modprobe -r`.  Never recommend using force flag.  Boot into safe mode and disable.
- Ex: `rmmod lp`

**Add Mod**
- Two ways to re-add:  Old way(hard), New way(easy).
- _Hard way - insmod_
  - Hard b/c we need to know exact module and path.  Use modinfo.
  - Modinfo.  Defaults to running kernel, no need for a path.
  - Use output for insmod.  Ex: `modinfo lp` tells us 'filename' path for lp mod.
  - Use that in insmod.
- _Easy way - modprobe_
  - `modprobe lp`  If it succeeded, completes silently.
  - modinfo tells us params, like with lp you can `modprobe lp reset=1`

**Other Module Changes of Interest**
Alias
Force install/load (like if a dep could not be detected)
Remove even if it has a device that would normally cause it to load
Blacklist, if wanted to override its use on system at reboot

```bash
rmay@dev-vm:~/$ ls /etc/modprobe.d/
alsa-base.conf                  blacklist-ath_pci.conf  blacklist-firewire.conf     blacklist-modem.conf  blackli..
amd64-microcode-blacklist.conf  blacklist.conf          blacklist-framebuffer.conf  blacklist-oss.conf    intel-mi..

```

`cat /etc/modprobe.d/dist.conf`
- See aliases, installs, removes
- Ex: blacklist Nuvo driver to allow nvidia proprietary driver to load.

blah

#### Viewing and Changing Kernel Parameters
`/proc/sys` and sysctl
The /proc/sys filesystem is not really a fs, it is a memory based fs that is mounted under /proc.
- Remember everything in Linux is treated as a file.
- So we have K module settings (residing in memory) that we can monkey with as a file.

```bash
rmay@dev-vm:/$ cat /proc/sys/dev/parport/default/spintime 
500
```
- echo 550 into spintime.
- Reboot clears if there is a problem.  So this is temporary.

```bash
rmay@dev-vm:/$ sudo sysctl -a | grep parport
dev.parport.default.spintime = 550
dev.parport.default.timeslice = 200

```
sysctl - Set via `sysctl dev.parport.default.spintime = 560`

Defaults come from compiled in defaults or sysctl.conf.  Edit `/etc/sysctl.conf` to make a persistent change.
- Best practice for editing, append to bottom and comment section as user overrides.

#### Displaying information about system hardware
Lots of utilities for this.

##### LSPCI
There are a number of devices that are intrinsic to system.  Could be a port on the motherboard.
- On system bus, constantly available.  `lspci`.  Bridges (ie PCI bridge), hubs, controller (sata controller), etc.
- On virtual machine, this is weird.
- `lspci` output
  - port/slot/etc, device name, other stuff
  - has a stepped verbose modes (-vvv)
- Useful for finding kernel modules associated with devices on system.

##### LSDEV
Returns Device, DMA, IRQ, IO Ports, scraped from /proc fs
Great if you are developing device drivers
Not present on old kernels

##### LSUSB
USB info, gives manufacter and device id, for online lookup.

#### Device Filesystem udev
The `/dev` filesystem, devices as files.
- In the past, this contained devices attached, and devices that could be attached (Linux system knew about them).
- The udev filesystem is a daemon that probes devices at boot.  After boot, the D will add the nessessary files to filesystem.

**Rules**
- Where the files exist/are contained
- How to make changes
- `/etc/udev/rules.d/`
- Higher number rules can override lower number rules
- Rule files contain anything that can be passed for/to the loadable module.

**UDEVADM**
Monitors UDEV activity
- `udevadmonitor`



