---
layout: post
current: post
cover: 'assets/images/os.png'
navigation: true
title: NIX OS
date: 2018-11-05 10:18:00
tags: linux
class: post-template
subclass: 'post tag-fiction'
author: rob
---

# Topics - NIX OS

> An operating system (OS) is system software that manages computer hardware and software resources and provides common services for computer programs.
- Wikipedia

Editor Note:
- The material below was cobbled together for personal use, from attributed sources, and endured some mild look/feel massage.
- Document Purpose: Conveniently scoped refresher on the listed Linux OS components.

Sources: 
- [The Art of Unix Programming](http://www.catb.org/esr/writings/taoup/html/)
- [The Linux Documentation Project](https://www.tldp.org/)
- [The Linux Information Project](http://www.linfo.org)
- [Thread (Computing) - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(computing))
- [Context Switching - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Context_switch)
- Google
- Photo by Jorik Kleen on Unsplash

## Processes
### Basics
- Processes carry out tasks within the operating system. A program is a set of machine code instructions and data stored in an executable image on disk and is, as such, a passive entity.
- A process can be thought of as a **computer program in action**.

### What it needs
- System resources (CPU, memory, files, etc)

### States
- _Running_: The process is either running (it is the current process in the system) or it is ready to run (it is waiting to be assigned to one of the system's CPUs).
- _Waiting_: 
  - The process is waiting for an event or for a resource. 
  - Linux differentiates between two types of waiting process; interruptible and uninterruptible. Interruptible waiting processes can be interrupted by signals whereas uninterruptible waiting processes are waiting directly on hardware conditions and cannot be interrupted under any circumstances.
- _Stopped_: The process has been stopped, usually by receiving a signal. A process that is being debugged can be in a stopped state.
- _Zombie_: 
  - This is a halted process which, for some reason, still has a task_struct data structure in the task vector. 
  - It is what it sounds like, a dead process.

### Note: 
- The scheduler needs the process state information in order to fairly decide which process in the system most deserves to run.

## Scheduling
### Basics
- It is the scheduler that must select the most deserving process to run out of all of the runnable processes in the system.
- Each process decides to relinquish the CPU that it is running on when it has to wait for some system event. 
- For example, a process may have to wait for a character to be read from a file. 
  - This waiting happens within the system call, in system mode; the process used a library function to open and read the file and it, in turn made system calls to read bytes from the open file. 
  - In this case the waiting process will be suspended and another, more deserving process will be chosen to run.

### How it works
- A runnable process is one which is waiting only for a CPU to run on. 
- Linux uses a reasonably simple priority based scheduling algorithm to choose between the current processes in the system. 
- When it has chosen a new process to run it saves the state of the current process, the processor specific registers and other context being saved in the processes task_struct data structure. 
- It then restores the state of the new process (again this is processor specific) to run and gives control of the system to that process.

### Fair Scheduling
- For the scheduler to fairly allocate CPU time between the runnable processes in the system it keeps information in the task_struct for each process:
  - _policy_: 
    - This is the scheduling policy that will be applied to this process. 
    - There are two types of Linux process, normal and real time.
  - _priority_:
    - This is the priority that the scheduler will give to this process. 
    - It is also the amount of time (in jiffies) that this process will run for when it is allowed to run. 
    - You can alter the priority of a process by means of system calls and the renice command.
  - _rt priorty_:
    - Linux supports real time processes and these are scheduled to have a higher priority than all of the other non-real time processes in system. 
    - This field allows the scheduler to give each real time process a relative priority. 
    - The priority of a real time processes can be altered using system calls.
  - _counter_:
    - This is the amount of time (in jiffies) that this process is allowed to run for. 
    - It is set to priority when the process is first run and is decremented each clock tick.

### Kernel relationship
- The scheduler is run from several places within the kernel. 
- It is run after putting the current process onto a wait queue and it may also be run at the end of a system call, just before a process is returned to process mode from system mode. 
- One reason that it might need to run is because the system timer has just set the current processes counter to zero. 
- Each time the scheduler is run it does the following:
  - _kernel work_: The scheduler runs the bottom half handlers and processes the scheduler task queue (lightweight kernel threads). 
  - _Current process_: The current process must be processed before another process can be selected to run.
  - _Process selection_: The scheduler looks through the processes on the run queue looking for the most deserving process to run. 
  - _Swap processes_: If the most deserving process to run is not the current process, then the current process must be suspended and the new one made to run.

## Threads
### Basics
- In computer science, a thread of execution is the smallest sequence of programmed instructions that can be managed independently by a scheduler.
- Threads are "light weight processes" (LWPs). 
- The idea is a process has five fundamental parts: code ("text"), data (VM), stack, file I/O, and signal tables. 
- Threads reduce overhead by sharing fundamental parts. By sharing these parts, switching happens much more frequently and efficiently. 
- There are two types of threads: user-space and kernel-space.

### Contrast to Processes
- Processes are typically independent, while threads exist as subsets of a process
- Processes carry considerably more state information than threads, whereas multiple threads within a process share process state as well as memory and other resources
- Processes have separate address spaces, whereas threads share their address space
- Processes interact only through system-provided inter-process communication mechanisms
- Context switching between threads in the same process is typically faster than context switching between processes.

## Context Switching
### Basics
- A context switch is the  computationally intensive switching of the CPU (central processing unit) from one process or thread to another.
- A context is the contents of a CPU's registers and program counter at any point in time.
  - A register is a small amount of very fast memory inside of a CPU (as opposed to the slower RAM main memory outside of the CPU) that is used to speed the execution of computer programs by providing quick access to commonly used values, generally those in the midst of a calculation.
- A context switch is sometimes described as the kernel suspending execution of one process on the CPU and resuming execution of some other process that had previously been suspended.
  - Or suspending progression of a process.

### How it works
- The kernel performing the following activities with regard to processes (including threads) on the CPU: 
  - (1) suspending the progression of one process and storing the CPU's state (i.e., the context) for that process somewhere in memory, 
  - (2) retrieving the context of the next process from memory and restoring it in the CPU's registers and 
  - (3) returning to the location indicated by the program counter (i.e., returning to the line of code at which the process was interrupted) in order to resume the process.

## Locks
### Basics
### How it works

## Mutexes
### Basics
### How it works

## Semaphores
### Basics
### How it works

## Monitors
### Basics
### How it works

## Concurrency issues
### Basics
### How it works

## Deadlock, livelock
### Basics
### How it works
### How to avoid

## Concurrency constructs
### In modern OSs, basics